Restructure MAAS doc (#1114)
spectrocloud/librarium: content/docs/04-clusters/02-data-center/01-maas/05-install-manage-maas-pcg.md

</InfoBox>

Palette provides an installer in the form of a docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation or jump-box. You can run the installer on any system that has a docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint.

# Prerequisites

- A linux computer with a docker daemon installed and a connection to Palette and the MAAS endpoint. The installer must be invoked on a linux system.

- One IP address for a Kubernetes control-plane.

- One IP address for a single-node gateway or three IP addresses for a three-node gateway.

- Sufficient IPs for application workload services, such as Load Balancer services.

<WarningBox>

By default, the MAAS Kubernetes pack uses 192.168.0.0/16. Ensure that the Pod CIDR range for any clusters you deploy after setting up the PCG do not overlap with the network used by the bare metal machines that MAAS manages.

</WarningBox>

- Minimum capacity requirements as follows:

    - One node (no HA): 4 vCPU, 8 GiB Memory, 60 GiB Storage.
    - Three nodes (HA): 6 vCPU, 12 GiB Memory, 90 GiB Storage.<br /><br />

> - An active MAAS API key in the format  ``[consumer_key], [key], and [secret] tokens: API key = '[consumer_key]:[key]:[secret]'``.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An active MAAS API key in the format  ``[consumer_key], [key], and [secret] tokens: API key = '[consumer_key]:[key]:[secret]'``. Refer to the [MAAS API authentication](https://maas.io/docs/api-authentication-reference) to learn more.

```
This can be confusing for new users so let's reference the maas API auth docs.

Author: done

- The DNS server that the installer will use must be able to resolve the public internet names of the machines that MAAS manages because the installer must connect to the machines.  

    The installer must connect to the MAAS machines. This is commonly done by ensuring the DNS server delegates the MAAS domain to the MAAS controlplane. To connect, the installer uses the FQDN ``machine-hostname.maas``. A common way to enable this is to ensure that the DNS server delegates the MAAS domain to the MAAS controlplane.

# Install the Gateway

> `video: title: "maas-pcg-creation": /pcg-creation-video/maas.mp4`

Reviewer: Let's remove this video as it's out of date.

Author: removed

Follow these steps to install the PCG. 

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com).

2. From the **User Menu**, select Cluster Mode and choose **Tenant Admin**.

3. Navigate to the **Main** menu and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateway** below the table.

4. Select **MAAS**. Private Gateway installation instructions are displayed.

> 5. Copy the pairing code displayed on the instructions page. You will input this code when you run the installer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Copy the pairing code displayed on the instructions page. You will input this code when you use the installer.
```
Let's try to avoid words that fall under the ableism category.

6. Copy the following commands to your terminal to invoke the installer.
    <br />

    ```bash
    docker run -it --rm \
    --net=host \
    -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
    -v /tmp:/opt/spectrocloud \

>     gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.11 \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.12 \
```
By the time we merge this 3.2 should be released and `1.0.12` is the new image.

Author: updated to 1.0.12

    -o true
    ```

7. When prompted, enter information listed in each of the following tables. The installer will generate the gateway configuration file. 
    <br />

    <WarningBox>

>     When specifying the MAAS endpoint, be sure not to add a trailing / .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When specifying the MAAS endpoint, do not add a trailing `/` as it can result in DNS resolution errors.
```
Explaining the why 😃

Author: thanks for that! Added it.

    </WarningBox>

    <br />

> #### Palette Information:

Reviewer: Should we call this section Palette Parameters or something along those lines? These all look like input configurations.

Author: Yes, relabeled this to Palette Parameters.

| **Service IP Range (--svc_ip_range)**|The IP address range that will be used to assign IP addresses to services in Kubernetes clusters. The service IP addresses should be unique and not overlap with any virtual machine IPs in the environment.|

<br />

#### MAAS Account Information:

|**Parameter**| **Description**|
|-------------|----------------|
| **API Endpoint** | The MAAS API endpoint. This can be a domain or IP address. Example: http://10.11.12.13:5240/MAAS.|
| **API Key** |Generate an API key from MAAS and enter it when prompted. This key will be used for authentication.|

<br />

#### MAAS server configuration:

When the installer prompts you, select the following:

- Availability Zone
- Domain
- Resource Pool
- One node (no HA) or three nodes (HA)

The installer generates a gateway configuration file and its location is displayed on the console.
For example: <br />

``Config created:/opt/spectrocloud//User-define-MaaS-Gateway-Name-20210805155034/pcg.yaml``

> <br />

Reviewer: This feels like a step.

Author: Made this a step.

8. Copy the ``pcg.yaml`` file from ``/tmp/install-user-defined-MaaS-Gateway_Name/pcg.yaml`` to ``/tmp``.

<WarningBox>

After you copy ``pcg.yaml``, delete it from ``/tmp/install-user-defined-MaaS-Gateway_Name/pcg.yaml`` because it contains your Spectro Cloud credential.

</WarningBox>

9. To deploy the gateway, copy the following code snippet to your terminal and provide the gateway configuration file as input.
<br />

    ```bash
    docker run -it --rm \
    --net=host \
    -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
    -v /tmp:/opt/spectrocloud \

>     gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.11 \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.12 \
```

Author: Changed this to 1.0.12

---
title: "Install and Manage MAAS Gateway"
metaTitle: "Install and Manage MAAS Private Cloud Gateway"
metaDescription: "Learn how to install and manage the MAAS Private Cloud Gateway in Palette."
hideToC: false
fullWidth: false
---

import Tabs from 'shared/components/ui/Tabs';
import WarningBox from 'shared/components/WarningBox';
import InfoBox from 'shared/components/InfoBox';
import PointsOfInterest from 'shared/components/common/PointOfInterest';

> # Overview 

Reviewer: Rita, there are four how-to guides on this page. The heading sizes need to be adjusted so that the four how-to show up on the right navigation menu. 

I think these are the top-level headings we need,

# Install the Gateway
# Update and Manage MAAS Gateway
# Delete MAAS Gateway
# Resize MAAS Gateway
# Next Steps

![CleanShot 2023-02-28 at 10 04 10](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29551334/221925237-8cd83a7d-e939-49a8-bcae-48a1dad5bf8c.png)

Author: @karl-cardenas-coding Adjusted heading sizes in this doc but left the two remaining docs as is since they are single how-tos. 
This doc originally followed our how-to style but as I understand your comment, when there are multiple how-tos that fall under the "manage" category as this one does, we should mind the right navigation menu and adjust headings.

The Private Cloud Gateway (PCG) enables support for isolated private cloud or data center environments. You can set up the cloud gateway as a single-node or three-node cluster based on your requirements for high availability (HA).  
<br />

<InfoBox>

For production environments, we recommend using three nodes. If you initially set up the gateway with one node, you can resize it at a later time. 

</InfoBox>

> Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation or jump box. You can use the installer on any system that has a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint.

Reviewer 2: @ritawatson @antongisli the installer does not work on MacOS. The only environment that I have personally tested it on is Linux amd64.

> Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation or jump box. You can use the installer on any system that has a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint.

Author: Added a warning that the installer doesn't currently work on MacOS.

> Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation or jump box. You can use the installer on any system that has a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint.

Author: Added a warning.

# Prerequisites

> - Canonical [MAAS installed](https://maas.io/), set up, and available in your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Canonical [MAAS installed](https://maas.io/docs/how-to-install-maas), set up, and available in your environment.
```
Let's point to their how-to guide.

- A linux computer with a Docker daemon installed and a connection to Palette and the MAAS endpoint. The installer must be invoked on a linux system. We have testing the gateway installation using Ubuntu 20.04.

> - One IP address for a Kubernetes control plane.

Author: @antongisli @TylerGillson 
It looks to be taken from this prerequisite in the original doc, but VIP is removed. Should the doc list the original prerequisite excluding "VIP"? 

![CleanShot 2023-02-28 at 16 58 05](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/117382432/222018150-dc564185-b5c9-41c5-ace0-415dd88977da.png)

> - One IP address for a single-node gateway or three IP addresses for a three-node gateway.

Author: @antongisli @TylerGillson 
The screenshot shows how the original doc lists it. Maybe use the bullet/sub-bullet format from the original. This answers the question above. This can be changed as follows - the bullet point about workload cluster addresses a potential missing prereq shown in the screenshot in the comment for line 46.

- PCG IP requirements as follows:
   - One IP address for a single-node gateway or three IP addresses for a three-node gateway.
   - One IP for a Kubernetes control plane.
- One IP for each workload cluster.

![CleanShot 2023-02-28 at 17 08 46](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/117382432/222019093-38a10759-d901-4210-aa78-2a42416c329a.png)

> - One IP address for a single-node gateway or three IP addresses for a three-node gateway.

Reviewer 3: "One IP for each workload cluster." doesn't make sense to me either.

- Sufficient IPs for application workload services, such as Load Balancer services.

<WarningBox>

By default, the MAAS Kubernetes pack uses 192.168.0.0/16. Ensure that the Pod CIDR range for any clusters you deploy after setting up the PCG do not overlap with the network used by the bare metal machines that MAAS manages.

</WarningBox>

- Minimum capacity requirements as follows:

    <br />

    - One node (no HA): 4 CPU, 8 GiB Memory, 60 GiB Storage.
   

>     - Three nodes (HA): 6 CPU, 12 GiB Memory, 90 GiB Storage.<br /><br />

Author: @antongisli This might come from the info in your notes in the screenshot below. However, I can't seem to locate the original information for storage or 3 nodes.  

![CleanShot 2023-02-28 at 17 33 39](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/117382432/222022239-baa98529-b78d-4b5b-994e-9ec3f81080a4.png)

>     - Three nodes (HA): 6 CPU, 12 GiB Memory, 90 GiB Storage.<br /><br />

Reviewer 2: @ritawatson the installer CLI enforces the following minimums per node, regardless of whether there is one node or three:

- 4 CPUs
- 4096 MiB memory
- 60 GB storage

>     - Three nodes (HA): 6 CPU, 12 GiB Memory, 90 GiB Storage.<br /><br />

Reviewer 3: ok thx Tyler, so something like:
Each node in the PCG cluster requires a machine from MAAS in a ready state, and with the following resources:

- 4 CPUs
- 4096 MiB memory
- 60 GiB storage

that said, @TylerGillson just double checking but did you confirm it works with 4096 MiB? when I was using the old installer, I had issues with <8192 MiB and IIRC @sadysnaat told me that the minimum needed was 8 GiB per node.

>     - Three nodes (HA): 6 CPU, 12 GiB Memory, 90 GiB Storage.<br /><br />

Reviewer 2: @antongisli I have not validated that a single node PCG works with those minimums. Will do so today and confirm. That's just what's been baked into the source code since forever.

- An active [MAAS API](https://maas.io/docs/api-authentication-reference) key in the following format:

  ``[consumer_key], [key], and [secret] tokens: API key = '[consumer_key]:[key]:[secret]'``

>   You can obtain a [MAAS API key](https://maas.io/docs/how-to-manage-user-accounts#heading--api-key) from MAAS.

Author: added

  <br />

- The DNS server the installer will use must be able to resolve the public internet names of the machines that MAAS manages so it can connect to them. MAAS provides a DNS server, and the default zone that it manages is ***maas***. 

    The installer first requests machines from MAAS and then must connect to them. To connect, the installer attempts to use the FQDN ``machine-hostname.maas``. 

>     As shown in the diagram, a common way to enable this is to ensure the DNS server used by the installer delegates the MAAS domain to the MAAS control plane.

Author: added

>     ***IMAGE goes here.***

Author: diagram added

# Understand the Gateway Installation Process

The following steps outline the overall process to install the PCG. For detailed steps, refer to [Install the Gateway](/clusters/data-center/maas/install-manage-maas-pcg#installthegateway) below.

<br />

1. You obtain a pairing code in Palette that you will use later.

> 2. Use the Docker image to start the installation. 

Author: added

    The installer needs access to your Palette account and to one (no HA) or three (HA) machines in your MAAS cluster. If you select one machine in Palette, then you need one in MAAS. Likewise, if you select three machines in Palette, you need three in MAAS. The MAAS machines must have internet access and be in a ready state.
    <br />

> 3. The installer installs to the MAAS machines and uses the configuration file to build a new cluster to host the PCG application. 

Author: The style checker flagged (s) as a no-no, so I made it plane plural. I'll change it back to machine(s) - there's a reason for it here.

# Install the Gateway

The following steps will guide you to install the PCG. 
<br />

> 1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a tenant admin.

Author: @antongisli does the following work? Does your comment apply only to this log-in step, or to others in the MAAS doc too?

Log in to Palette's SaaS portal or your local [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) instance as a tenant admin.

> 2. If you have Single or Social Sign-On (SSO) enabled, you will need to disable it. 

Author: added

> 2. If you have Single or Social Sign-On (SSO) enabled, you will need to disable it. 

Reviewer 2: I haven't verified a PCG installation with SSO enabled. I think the docs are correct, but that limitation will go away in the next release when we deprecate username/password auth in favour of API keys. @arvind-sys can you confirm whether SSO must be disabled during PCG installation?

<WarningBox>

> The installer does not work with SSO or Social sign on, as they require a password.

Author: Added.

</WarningBox>

2. Navigate to the **Main Menu** and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateway**.

3. Click the **Create Private Cloud Gateway** button and select **MAAS**. Private Gateway installation instructions are displayed.

4. Copy the pairing code displayed in the instructions section of the page and paste it in a text file. You will input this code when you use the installer. 

5. Copy the following code snippet to your terminal to invoke the installer.
    <br />

    ```bash
    docker run -it --rm \
    --net=host \
    --volume /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
    --volume /tmp:/opt/spectrocloud \

>     gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.12

Reviewer 2: It is correct

    ```

6. When prompted, enter the pairing code and information listed in each of the following tables. The installer will generate the gateway configuration file. 
    <br />

#### Palette Parameters

|**Parameter**       | **Description**|
|:-----------------------------|---------------|

> |**Install Type**| Choose **Private Cloud Gateway** or **Self Hosted Enterprise Cluster**. <br />You can change your selection with the up or down keys.|

Author: @antongisli That was from the original doc. I'll remove it.

|**Cloud Type**| Choose MAAS.|
|**Name** | Enter a custom name for the PCG.|

> |**Endpoint** |Enter the Palette endpoint. Example: https://customername.console.spectrocloud.com. |

Author: @antongisli Changed this to say: 

Example for Palette SaaS portal: ``https://console.spectrocloud.com.``
Example for a self-hosted environment: ``https://customername.console.spectrocloud.com``

|**Username** |Enter your Palette username. This is your sign-in email address. Example: user1@company.com. |
|**Password** |Enter your Palette Password. This is your sign-in password.|

> |**Private Cloud Gateway** |Enter the PCG pairing code you copied from the instructions page in step **4**. |

Author: changed to noted

<br />

#### Environment Configuration

|**Parameter**| **Description**|
|:-------------|----------------|

> |**HTTPS Proxy (--https_proxy)**| Leave this blank unless you are using an HTTPS Proxy. This setting will be propagated to all the nodes launched in the proxy network. Example: ``https://USERNAME:PASSWORD@PROXYIP:PROXYPORT``.|

Author: changed to PCG

> | **HTTP Proxy(--http_proxy)**| Leave this blank unless you are using an HTTP Proxy. This setting will be propagated to all the nodes launched in the proxy network. Example: ``http://USERNAME:PASSWORD@PROXYIP:PROXYPORT``.|

Author: made the above changes.

| **No Proxy(--no_proxy)**| The default is blank. You can add a comma-separated list of local network classless inter-domain routing (CIDR) addresses, hostnames, and domain names that should be excluded from being a proxy. This setting will be propagated to all the nodes to bypass the proxy server. Example: ``maas.company.com,10.10.0.0/16``.|

> | **Pod CIDR (--pod_cidr)**|Enter the CIDR pool that will be used to assign IP addresses to pods in the cluster. The pod IP addresses should be unique and should not overlap with any virtual machine IPs in the environment.|

Author: deleted virtual.

| **Service IP Range (--svc_ip_range)**|Enter the IP address range that will be used to assign IP addresses to services in Kubernetes clusters. The service IP addresses should be unique and not overlap with any virtual machine IPs in the environment.|

<br />

#### MAAS Account Information

|**Parameter**| **Description**|
|-------------|----------------|
| **API Endpoint** |Enter the MAAS API endpoint. This can be a domain or IP address. Example: ``http://10.11.12.13:5240/MAAS.``|
| **API Key** |Enter an active MAAS API key to use for authentication.|

<br />

7. When the installer prompts you, select the following to configure the MAAS server:

    - Availability Zone
    - Domain
    - Resource Pool
    - One node (no HA) or three nodes (HA)

> The installer selects available bare metal machines in your MAAS environment on which to install the gateway. If the deployment fails due to misconfiguration, update the gateway configuration file and rerun the command.

Author: @antongisli @TylerGillson We deleted steps that contained information about the config file. Does it need to be re-included? 

![CleanShot 2023-02-28 at 19 17 24](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/117382432/222036269-0e9ae0a6-d4a3-4dac-bc5e-8627f1128359.png)

![CleanShot 2023-02-28 at 19 18 15](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/117382432/222036391-408c5218-bce6-4468-bc5d-c0554995eb4b.png)

> If you need assisstance, you can send a message to our **#support-sustaining** slack channel with questions.

Author: @karl-cardenas-coding Makes sense. The slack channel was mentioned in google review doc, but this is the route to take.

# Validation

Once installed, the gateway registers itself with Palette. To verify the gateway is registered, navigate to **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways > MAAS** and verify the gateway is listed on the Manage Private Cloud Gateways page. 

> When you install the gateway, an account is auto-created. To verify the account creation, go to **Tenant Settings > Cloud Accounts** and locate **MAAS** in the table. Verify your MAAS account is listed.

Author: changed it to "cloud account"

# Upgrade and Manage the MAAS Gateway

Palette maintains the Operating System (OS) image and all configurations for the PCG. Periodically, the OS images, configurations, and other components need to be upgraded to resolve security or functionality issues. Palette releases upgrades when required, and informs you with an upgrade notification on the gateway.

> Review the changes in the upgrade notification, and apply the upgrade when you are ready. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When an upgrade is available, review the changes in the upgrade notification, and apply the upgrade when you are ready. 
```

2. Navigate to the **Main menu** and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways**.

3. Click the **three-dot Menu** for the gateway instance you want to delete and choose **Delete**.

    Palette checks for running tenant clusters associated with the gateway instance and displays an error message if it detects any. 
    <br />

4. If there are running clusters, delete them and retry deleting the gateway instance.

# Resize the MAAS Gateway

You can set up a PCG as a single-node (no HA) or three-node (HA) cluster. You can set up a PCG initially with one node and resize it to three nodes at a later time.

<br />

<InfoBox>

For production environments, we recommend setting up three nodes.

</InfoBox>

Follow these steps to resize a single-node gateway to three nodes.

<br />

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a tenant admin.

2. Navigate to the **Main Menu** and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways**.

3. Click the **three-dot Menu** for the gateway instance you want to resize and choose **Set number of nodes**.

4. Change the number of nodes to 3.

Two new nodes will be created in the cluster.

# Next Steps

> You can now create tenant clusters in the default cloud account.  To get started, check out [Create and Manage MAAS Clusters](/clusters/data-center/maas/create-manage-maas-clusters).

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what "default" means here for cloud account? seems a remnant

Author: Yes, this is a remnant. Changed it to auto-created cloud account.

<br />

<WarningBox>

The installer does not currently work on MacOS.

</WarningBox>

## Prerequisites

- Canonical [MAAS installed](https://maas.io/docs/how-to-install-maas), set up, and available in your environment.

- A linux computer with a Docker daemon installed and a connection to Palette and the MAAS endpoint. The installer must be invoked on a linux system. We have tested the gateway installation using Ubuntu 20.04 on x86-64.

- Private cloud gateway IP requirements: <br /><br /> 
    
    - One IP address for a single-node gateway or three IP addresses for a three-node gateway.
    - One IP address for a Kubernetes control plane.

- Sufficient IPs for application workload services, such as Load Balancer services.

<WarningBox>

By default, the MAAS Kubernetes pack uses 192.168.0.0/16. Ensure that the Pod classless inter-domain routing (CIDR) range for any clusters you deploy after setting up the PCG do not overlap with the network used by the bare metal machines that MAAS manages.

</WarningBox>

- Each node in the PCG cluster requires a machine from MAAS in a ready state, and with the following resources:

    <br />

    - 4 CPUs
    - 4096 MiB memory

>     - 60 GiB storage<br /><br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - 60 GiB storage
```
I'm not sure why we are using double break lines here,

Author: fixed

- An active [MAAS API](https://maas.io/docs/api-authentication-reference) key in the following format:

  ``[consumer_key], [key], and [secret] tokens: API key = '[consumer_key]:[key]:[secret]'``

  You can obtain a [MAAS API key](https://maas.io/docs/how-to-manage-user-accounts#heading--api-key) from either the MAAS CLI or the UI.

  <br />

- The DNS server that the installer will use must be able to resolve the public internet names of the machines that MAAS manages so it can connect to them. MAAS provides a DNS server, and the default zone that it manages is ***maas***. 

    The installer first requests machines from MAAS and then must connect to them. To connect, the installer attempts to use the fully qualified domain name (FQDN) ``machine-hostname.maas``. 

    As shown in the diagram, a common way to enable this is to ensure the DNS server used by the installer delegates the MAAS domain to the MAAS control plane. Alternatively, configure the installer host to use the MAAS control plane as its DNS server. Ensure that **every** DNS server configured on the installer host can resolve the MAAS domain.

> ![MAAS DNS setup](/clusters_maas_maas-dns-setup.png)

Reviewer: Let's use a description that is more friendly to a screen reader.

---
title: "Install and Manage MAAS Gateway"
metaTitle: "Install and Manage MAAS Private Cloud Gateway"
metaDescription: "Learn how to install and manage the MAAS Private Cloud Gateway in Palette."
hideToC: false
fullWidth: false
---

import Tabs from 'shared/components/ui/Tabs';
import WarningBox from 'shared/components/WarningBox';
import InfoBox from 'shared/components/InfoBox';
import PointsOfInterest from 'shared/components/common/PointOfInterest';

# Overview 

The Private Cloud Gateway (PCG) enables support for private cloud or data center environments. You can set up the cloud gateway as a single-node or three-node cluster based on your requirements for high availability (HA).  
<br />

<InfoBox>

For production environments, we recommend using three nodes. If you initially set up the gateway with one node, you can resize it at a later time. 

</InfoBox>

> Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation or jump box. You can use the installer on any linux system that has a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation or jump box. You can use the installer on any linux x86-64 system that has a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint. 
```

> Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation or jump box. You can use the installer on any linux x86-64 system that has a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint. 

Reviewer: @ritawatson Linux is a noun so it should be capitalized as Vale is pointing out.

<br />

<WarningBox>

The installer does not currently work on MacOS.

</WarningBox>

## Prerequisites

- Canonical [MAAS installed](https://maas.io/docs/how-to-install-maas), set up, and available in your environment.

- A linux computer with a Docker daemon installed and a connection to Palette and the MAAS endpoint. The installer must be invoked on a linux system. We have tested the gateway installation using Ubuntu 20.04.

> - One IP address for a Kubernetes control plane.

Reviewer 2: Each node needs an IP and then we allocate an additional IP for the control plane's API server. I propose this wording:

Private cloud gateway IP requirements:
- One IP address per node: one for a single-node gateway or three for a three-node gateway.
- One IP for the Kubernetes control plane.

Reviewer 3: I assume we mean the PCG cluster's control plane? 
How is that IP obtained - is it via DHCP? & is it a virtual IP, since in a 3 node cluster I assume all 3 are master nodes? sorry but I am still confused over this IP address and I think readers will be too.

Reviewer 2: I would defer to @sadysnaat on that. I think we use [kube-vip in ARP mode](https://kube-vip.io/docs/modes/arp/) to handle the control plane VIP. But Deepak would know best.

>     - One IP address for a single-node gateway or three IP addresses for a three-node gateway.

Author: fixed

  ``[consumer_key], [key], and [secret] tokens: API key = '[consumer_key]:[key]:[secret]'``

  <br />

- The DNS server that the installer will use must be able to resolve the public internet names of the machines that MAAS manages so it can connect to them.  

    This is commonly done by ensuring the DNS server delegates the MAAS domain to the MAAS control plane. To connect, the installer uses the FQDN ``machine-hostname.maas``. A common way to enable this is to ensure the DNS server delegates the MAAS domain to the MAAS control plane.

# Understand the Gateway Installation Process

The following steps outline the overall process to install the PCG. For detailed steps, refer to [Install the Gateway](/clusters/data-center/maas/install-manage-maas-pcg#installthegateway) below.

<br />

1. You obtain a pairing code in Palette that you will use later.

2. Then you run a configuration script using a docker image. 

3. The script creates a PCG configuration file.

4. Next, you run the installer using the open-source Kind tool and provide the pairing code you obtained in step **1**. The installer uses the configuration file from script output in step **3**.

>     The installer needs access to your Palette account and to one or three machines in your MAAS cluster. If you select one machine in Palette, then you need one in MAAS. Likewise, if you select three machines in Palette, you need three in MAAS. The MAAS machines must have internet access and be in a ready state.

Reviewer: @ritawatson I spoke to Tyler, and he pointed out that there is no need to break out the steps. The install can be done in one step. So we can remove steps 3 and 4.  We just need to update the install command and remove the `-o` flag.

Author: Removed steps 3 and 4. Kept last paragraph with step 2 per Tyler. He says this is useful info.

    <br />

> 5. The installer installs to the MAAS machine(s) and uses the configuration file to build a new cluster to host the PCG application. 

Author: fixed

> 5. The installer installs to the MAAS machine(s) and uses the configuration file to build a new cluster to host the PCG application. 

Author: removed ( )

# Install the Gateway

The following steps will guide you to install the PCG. 
<br />

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a tenant admin.

2. Navigate to the **Main** menu and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateway**.

3. Click the **Create Private Cloud Gateway** button and select **MAAS**. Private Gateway installation instructions are displayed.

4. Copy the pairing code displayed in the Instructions section of the page and paste it in a text file. You will input this code when you run the installer. 

5. Copy the following code snippet to your terminal to invoke the installer.
    <br />

    ```bash

>     docker run -it --rm \
>     --net=host \
>     -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
>     -v /tmp:/opt/spectrocloud \
>     gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.12 \
>     -o true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    docker run -it --rm \
    --net=host \
    --volume /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
    --volume /tmp:/opt/spectrocloud \
    gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.12
```
Adding the longform of the commands. --rm and --it are best left as it. Also removed the `-o` flag.

| **No Proxy(--no_proxy)**| The default is blank. You can add a comma-separated list of local network classless inter-domain routing (CIDR) addresses, hostnames, and domain names that should be excluded from being a proxy. This setting will be propagated to all the nodes to bypass the proxy server. Example: ``maas.company.com,10.10.0.0/16``.|
| **Pod CIDR (--pod_cidr)**|Enter the CIDR pool that will be used to assign IP addresses to pods in the cluster. The pod IP addresses should be unique and should not overlap with any virtual machine IPs in the environment.|
| **Service IP Range (--svc_ip_range)**|Enter the IP address range that will be used to assign IP addresses to services in Kubernetes clusters. The service IP addresses should be unique and not overlap with any virtual machine IPs in the environment.|

<br />

#### MAAS Account Information

<WarningBox>

When specifying the MAAS endpoint, do not add a trailing `/` as it can result in DNS resolution errors.

</WarningBox>

|**Parameter**| **Description**|
|-------------|----------------|

> | **API Endpoint** |Enter the MAAS API endpoint without a trailing /. This can be a domain or IP address. Example: ``http://10.11.12.13:5240/MAAS.``|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **API Endpoint** |Enter the MAAS API endpoint without a trailing `/`. This can be a domain or IP address. Example: ``http://10.11.12.13:5240/MAAS.``|
```

    - Availability Zone
    - Domain
    - Resource Pool
    - One node (no HA) or three nodes (HA)

    <br />

    The installer generates a ``pcg.yaml`` configuration file and displays the file location on the console. For example: <br />

``Config created:/opt/spectrocloud//User-defined-MaaS-Gateway-Name-20210805155034/pcg.yaml``

<br />

8. Copy the ``pcg.yaml`` file out of ``/tmp/install-user-defined-MaaS-Gateway_Name-20210805155034/pcg.yaml`` and into ``/tmp``.

``` bash
cp /tmp/install-user-defined-MaaS-Gateway_Name-20210805155034/pcg.yaml /tmp
```
<br />

<WarningBox>

After you copy ``pcg.yaml``, delete it from ``/tmp/install-user-defined-MaaS-Gateway_Name/pcg.yaml`` because it contains your Spectro Cloud credential.

</WarningBox>

<br />

9. To deploy the gateway, copy the following code snippet to your terminal and provide the gateway configuration file as input.
<br />

    ```bash
    docker run -it --rm \
    --net=host \
    -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
    -v /tmp:/opt/spectrocloud \
    gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.12 \
    -s true \
    -c //opt/spectrocloud/pcg.yaml

>     ```

Reviewer: This can all be removed as we are doing the install in one swing.

Author: Removed.

The installer selects available bare metal machines in your MAAS environment on which to install the gateway. If the deployment fails due to misconfiguration, update the gateway configuration file and rerun the command.

If you need assisstance, you can send a message to our **#support-sustaining** slack channel with questions.

# Validation

> Once installed, the gateway registers itself with Palette's SaaS portal. To verify the gateway is registered, navigate to **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways > MAAS** and verify the gateway is listed on the Manage Private Cloud Gateways page. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once installed, the gateway registers itself with Palette. To verify the gateway is registered, navigate to **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways > MAAS** and verify the gateway is listed on the Manage Private Cloud Gateways page. 
```
The portal is the UI, it's the API server that actually accepts the registration so we can just say Palette.

# Delete the MAAS Gateway

Follow these steps to delete a MAAS gateway.
<br />

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a tenant admin.

2. Navigate to the **Main** menu and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways**.

3. Click the **three-dot Menu** for the gateway instance you want to delete and choose **Delete**.

    Palette checks for running tenant clusters associated with the gateway instance and displays an error message if it detects any. 
    <br />

4. If there are running clusters, delete them and retry deleting the gateway instance.

# Resize the MAAS Gateway

You can set up a PCG as a single-node (no HA) or three-node (HA) cluster. You can set up a PCG initially with one node and resize it to three nodes at a later time.

<br />

<InfoBox>

For production environments, we recommend setting up three nodes.

</InfoBox>

Follow these steps to resize a single-node gateway to three nodes.

<br />

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a tenant admin.

> 2. Navigate to the **Main** menu and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Navigate to the **Main Menu** and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways**.
```

3. Click the **three-dot Menu** for the gateway instance you want to resize and choose **Set number of nodes**.

4. Change the number of nodes to 3.

>     Two new nodes will be created in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two new nodes will be created in the cluster.
```
Fixing indentation.

> # Next Steps

Reviewer: Awesome, glad to see you add these.

</InfoBox>

Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation, or jump box. You can use the installer on any linux x86-64 system that has a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint. 

<br />

<WarningBox>

The installer does not currently work on running on Apple Silicon..

</WarningBox>

## Prerequisites

- Canonical [MAAS installed](https://maas.io/docs/how-to-install-maas), set up, and available in your environment.

- A linux computer with a Docker daemon installed and a connection to Palette and the MAAS endpoint. The installer must be invoked on a linux system. We have tested the gateway installation using Ubuntu 20.04 on x86-64.

- Private cloud gateway IP requirements: <br /><br /> 
    
    - One IP address available in the MaaS subnet for the PCG for a single-node gateway, or three available IP addresses for a three-node gateway.

    - One IP address available in the MaaS subnet for the Kubernetes api-server endpoint, when deploying a three-node gateway.

- Sufficient available IPs within the configured MaaS subnets.

<WarningBox>

> By default, the MAAS Kubernetes pac uses a pod classless inter-domain routing (CIDR) range of 192.168.0.0/16. Ensure that the pod CIDR range for any clusters you deploy after setting up the PCG do not overlap with the network used by the bare metal machines that MAAS manages.

Reviewer 4: @ritawatson "pac" should be "pack"

> By default, the MAAS Kubernetes pac uses a pod classless inter-domain routing (CIDR) range of 192.168.0.0/16. Ensure that the pod CIDR range for any clusters you deploy after setting up the PCG do not overlap with the network used by the bare metal machines that MAAS manages.

Author: fixed typo

---
title: "Install and Manage MAAS Gateway"
metaTitle: "Install and Manage MAAS Private Cloud Gateway"
metaDescription: "Learn how to install and manage the MAAS Private Cloud Gateway in Palette."
hideToC: false
fullWidth: false
---

import Tabs from 'shared/components/ui/Tabs';
import WarningBox from 'shared/components/WarningBox';
import InfoBox from 'shared/components/InfoBox';
import PointsOfInterest from 'shared/components/common/PointOfInterest';

# Overview 

The Private Cloud Gateway (PCG) enables support for private cloud or data center environments. You can set up the cloud gateway as a single-node or three-node cluster based on your requirements for high availability (HA).  
<br />

> <InfoBox>

Reviewer: See the comment in the prerequisite section for how we can remove this callout box.

Author: Added to one of the prereqs

For production environments, we recommend using three nodes. If you initially set up the gateway with one node, you can resize it at a later time. 

</InfoBox>

> Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation, or jump box. You can use the installer on any linux x86-64 system that has a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Palette provides an installer in the form of a Docker container that is temporarily deployed on your laptop, workstation, or jump box. You can use the installer on any Linux x86-64 system with a Docker daemon installed and connectivity to Palette and the MAAS identity endpoint. 
```
Linux is a noun in this context

Author: Fixed

<br />

<WarningBox>

> The installer does not currently work on running on Apple Silicon.

Reviewer 4: @ritawatson missing "MacOS", sentence should be "work on MacOS running on Apple Silicon"

Author: fixed.

</WarningBox>

## Prerequisites

- Canonical [MAAS installed](https://maas.io/docs/how-to-install-maas), set up, and available in your environment.

> - A linux computer with a Docker daemon installed and a connection to Palette and the MAAS endpoint. The installer must be invoked on a linux system. We have tested the gateway installation using Ubuntu 20.04 on x86-64.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Linux environment with a Docker daemon installed and a connection to Palette and the MAAS endpoint. The installer must be invoked on a Linux system. 
```
Let's remove the last sentence, as we don't want to get into the habit of listing what OS the app has been tested on. This will help reduce the maintenance burden of this document.

Author: Fixed

- Private cloud gateway IP requirements: <br /><br /> 
    
    - For a single-node gateway, one IP address available in the MaaS subnet for the PCG, or three available IP addresses for a three-node gateway.
    <br />

    - One IP address available in the MaaS subnet for the Kubernetes api-server endpoint, when deploying a three-node gateway.

- Sufficient available IPs within the configured MaaS subnets.

<WarningBox>

By default, the MAAS Kubernetes pack uses a pod classless inter-domain routing (CIDR) range of 192.168.0.0/16. Ensure that the pod CIDR range for any clusters you deploy after setting up the PCG do not overlap with the network used by the bare metal machines that MAAS manages.

</WarningBox>

- Each node in the PCG cluster requires a machine from MAAS in a ready state with the following resources:

    <br />

    - 4 CPUs
    - 8192 MiB memory 
    - 60 GiB storage

<WarningBox>

We recommend 100 GiB of storage for PCG nodes, as nodes can run out of 60 GoB of storage with prolonged use.

> </WarningBox>

Reviewer: We can combine this with the first blue callout box and state our recommendation. We can also add it as a prerequisite bullet. That way, we reduce two callout boxes. Right now we have eight callout boxes, and we should use these sparingly.

Author: Revised prereqs and removed 2 callout boxes.

    

- An active [MAAS API key](https://maas.io/docs/api-authentication-reference) which can be generated in the MAAS web console under **My Preferences** > **API keys**. The following is an example key:

  ``APn53wz232ZwBMxDp5:MHZIbUp3e4DJTjZEKg:mdEv33WAG536MhNC8mIywNLtjcDTnFAQ``

 For details, refer to the MAAS document on [how to add an API key](https://maas.io/docs/how-to-manage-user-accounts#heading--api-key).

  <br />

- The DNS server that the PCG installer will use, must be able to resolve the DNS names of machines that MAAS deploys so it can connect to them. The default setup is to use the MAAS server as the DNS server for any bare metal servers that it deploys. The default MAAS DNS zone is ``.maas``. You can use ``.maas`` or you can use the MAAS web console to create a new DNS zone. When you deploy the PCG and clusters, you can select the desired DNS zone in which DNS name records should be created.

>     In the MAAS subnets configuration, you can specify which DNS servers that servers in the MAAS subnet should use. 

Reviewer 4: @ritawatson "that servers" --> "those servers"

Author: fixed typo

    <br />

    ```bash
    docker run -it --rm \
    --net=host \
    --volume /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
    --volume /tmp:/opt/spectrocloud \
    gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/spectro-installer:1.0.12
    ```

7. When prompted, enter the pairing code and information listed in each of the following tables. The installer will generate the gateway configuration file. 
    <br />

#### Palette Parameters

|**Parameter**       | **Description**|
|:-----------------------------|---------------|
|**Install Type**| Choose **Private Cloud Gateway**. <br />You can change your selection with the up or down keys.|
|**Cloud Type**| Choose MAAS.|
|**Name** | Enter a custom name for the PCG. Example: ``maas-pcg-1``.|
|**Endpoint** |Enter the Palette endpoint URL. When using the Palette SaaS service, enter ``https://console.spectrocloud.com``. When using a dedicated instance of Palette, enter the URL for that instance. |
|**Username** |Enter your Palette username. This is your sign-in email address. Example: ``user1@company.com``. |
|**Password** |Enter your Palette Password. This is your sign-in password.|

> |**Private Cloud Gateway** |Enter the pairing code you noted from the instructions page in step **5**. |

Reviewer 4: @ritawatson change `**Private Cloud Gateway**` to `**Pairing Code**`

Author: fixed typo

| **Pod CIDR (--pod_cidr)**|Enter the CIDR pool that will be used to assign IP addresses to pods in the cluster. The pod IP addresses should be unique and should not overlap with any machine IPs in the environment.|
| **Service IP Range (--svc_ip_range)**|Enter the IP address range that will be used to assign IP addresses to services in Kubernetes clusters. The service IP addresses should be unique and not overlap with any virtual machine IPs in the environment.|

<br />

#### MAAS Account Information

|**Parameter**| **Description**|
|-------------|----------------|
| **API Endpoint** |Enter the MAAS API endpoint. This can be a domain or IP address. Example: ``http://10.11.12.13:5240/MAAS``.|
| **API Key** |Enter an active MAAS API key to use for authentication.|

<br />

8. When the installer prompts you, select the appropriate option for each of the following items to define which machines should be selected on the MAAS server for deployment as a PCG:

    - Availability Zone
    - Domain
    - Resource Pool
    - One node (no HA) or three nodes (HA)

> 9. Ensure that the MAAS server has one or more machines in the Ready state for the chosen Availability Zone and Resource Pool combination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Ensure the MAAS server has one or more machines in the **Ready** state for the chosen Availability Zone and Resource Pool combination.
```

Author: fixed

When you have entered all the configuration values, the installer saves the gateway configuration file to disk and prints its location before proceeding with the installation. For example:

``/tmp/install-user-defined-MaaS-Gateway_Name-20210805155034/pcg.yaml``

<br />

<InfoBox>

> Due to the Docker volume mount, when you see ``/opt/spectrocloud`` in the installer logs, it actually refers to ``/tmp`` on the machine running the installer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The folder ``/opt/spectrocloud``is volume mapped to the `/tmp` folder on the host machine. 
```
Simplified the message.

Author: fixed

Updating the cloud gateway does not result in any downtime for the tenant clusters. During the update process, new cluster provisioning is unavailable. New cluster requests are queued and processed when the gateway update is complete.

<br />

# Delete the MAAS Gateway

Follow these steps to delete a MAAS gateway.
<br />

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a tenant admin.

2. Navigate to the **Main menu** and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways**.

3. Click the **three-dot Menu** for the gateway instance you want to delete and choose **Delete**.

    Palette checks for running tenant clusters associated with the gateway instance and displays an error message if it detects any. 
    <br />

4. If there are running clusters, delete them and retry deleting the gateway instance.

<br />

# Resize the MAAS Gateway

You can set up a PCG as a single-node (no HA) or three-node (HA) cluster. You can set up a PCG initially with one node and resize it to three nodes at a later time.

<br />

<InfoBox>

For production environments, we recommend setting up three nodes.

</InfoBox>

> Follow these steps to resize a single-node gateway to three nodes.

Reviewer: We should mention the PCG size requirements and the IP address requirements.  This also needs a prerequisite section and validation.

Each PCG node requires the following:
4 CPUs
8192 MiB memory
60 GiB storage

<br />

1. Log in to [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) as a tenant admin.

2. Navigate to the **Main Menu** and select **Tenant Settings > Private Cloud Gateways**.

3. Click the **three-dot Menu** for the gateway instance you want to resize and choose **Set number of nodes**.

4. Change the number of nodes to 3.

> Two new nodes will be created in the cluster.

Reviewer: How do we validate this? Hint validation section

Author: Added validation
